---
title: Do you see nothing there? Nothing at all. [Writing]
author: ''
date: '2017-10-16'
slug: do-you-see-nothing-there-nothing-at-all-writing
---


Hamlet begins with the ghost, the catalyst to the play’s plot. The dialogue with the ghost provides Hamlet the spark on his path to revenge. Though the ghost is on stage in only a few scenes, the implication of its existence dominates the background of the play. The audience must decide whether the ghost can be trusted, for it is the justification for Hamlet’s action (or inaction) throughout most of the play. In this essay, I argue that the ghost of King Hamlet becomes a figment of Hamlet’s imagination after he first encounters it in Act I Scene IV. In other words, the ghost is an independent actor when it appears to Hamlet in initially; however, the transition from Scene IV to Scene V marks the ghost’s transformation to a thing disassociated with reality, existing only in Hamlet’s mind.


In Act 1, there are logical implications that elucidate the ghost’s ability to appear in the world.  From these constraints, the audience can discern the actual from the imaginary instances of the ghost. For when the ghost does not follow these constraints, there is evidence that the ghost becomes a creation of Hamlet’s mind. This chimerical being, introduced by the appearance of the actual ghost, may be caused by the trauma, stress, madness, or loneliness that Hamlet experiences after the death of his father, King Hamlet. Discovering the exact origin of Hamlet’s conception of the imaginary ghost is irrelevant to the legitimacy of this essay’s claim; however, the establishment that there are many potential triggers to its genesis is pertinent to its feasibility.


First, I will determine the constraint of time. In Act I Scene I, the ghost appears for the third time, exactly outside the castle at the guard platform at precisely one o’clock at night. Barnardo speaks to Horatio telling him to stay while he describes “what we have two nights seen”(I:I:33). Midway through his story, he is immediately interrupted. Barnardo begins saying that “The bell then beating one ―”, yet he does not finish, for the ghost instantly enters the stage (I:I:39). Therefore, the ghost establishes a pattern of appearing at this specific time. Though this pattern does not mean absolutely that the ghost can only appear then, the immediacy of the ghost’s entrance is indicative that the particular consistency is vital.


Furthermore, when Horatio and Marcellus bring Hamlet to visit the ghost, the ghost for the forth time appears at the same time. Outside the castle, on the guard platform, Hamlet asks what time it is. Horatio responds by saying that he “thinks it lacks of twelve”, yet Marcellus, declaring “No, it has stuck” corrects him. Thus, the reader again is given an indication that it is past twelve, approaching one o’clock, that the ghost will come soon. The convention remains true, the ghost arrives soon after, and Hamlet is first introduced to it. Later on, the ghost disappears because morning arrives. Barnado claims that “[the ghost] was about to speak, but then the cock crew,” (I:I:147) and it disappeared for “the cock, that is a trumpet to the morn,” (I:I:150) signaled that its time was up. Therefore, the ghost, through the evidence in the text, is constrained to only be able to appear between one o’clock and morning. 

Secondly, I will determine the constraint of place. The ghost appears in the same place— the guard platform outside the castle—in all mentioned and acted events before Act I Scene V. If its’ dialogue with Hamlet is truthful, then the ghost sought him so that it could “Revenge [its’] foul and most unnatural murder” (I:IV:25). Therefore, it is unlikely that he would choose to only appear on the guard platform if he did not have the constraint of place burdening his ability to appear elsewhere. Moreover, there are no rumors or references to a ghost seen around the castle by the other characters, whereas the appearance of a ghostly King Hamlet would surely incite vociferous and scandalous gossip throughout the castle. By the implication of these two constraints on the ghost, though not impossible, it is unlikely that Hamlet’s interactions with the ghost after Act I Scene IV are reliable. Furthermore, there are indications that support that the ghost before and after are disparate. 


When Hamlet speaks to the ghost in Act I Scene V and Act III Scene IV, the ghost breaks at least one of the constraints that are laboriously and exactly defined by the author. In accordance with this, there are details that alert differences between ghosts. For example, in Act III Scene IV, Hamlet proclaims when the ghost appears: “My father, in his habit as he lived!” (135). However, in Act I Scene IV, he says that “…thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,” (52). In the former scene, Hamlet envisions the ghost in its bed clothing or courtly garb, but in the latter in its armor (as does Marcellus and Horatio). This difference, though cosmetic, leads the audience to visualize the difference between the former and latter ghosts and to contemplate its significance. 
Furthermore, after Act I Scene IV no character other than Hamlet can see the ghost and throughout the entire play, no other character can hear the ghost. In Act III, Gertrude, perplexed, questions Hamlet, asking “To whom do you speak this?” as he speaks to the invisible apparition. Then, he, flustered, asks Gertrude, “Do you see nothing there?” She responds saying “Nothing at all” (IV:132-133). In Act I, as Hamlet coerces Marcellus and Horatio to swear to tell no one, the ghost (unseen by the characters) calls out “Swear” (V:155) and “Swear by his sword” (V:155), yet they do not hear the ghost. This parallel between these two scenes show that in these instances the ghost is not operating within the realm of reality but within that of Hamlet’s mind since the ghost does not interact with the other characters.


Moreover, the appearance of Hamlet’s imagination of the ghost is followed by a change Hamlet’s language and personality noticed by other characters, signifying a change in Hamlet’s mental state that may be causing his envisioning of the ghost. For example, in Act III, Gertrude comments “This is the very coinage of your brain/ This bodiless creation ecstasy” ( IV:137-138). Similarly, in Act I, Horatio, responding to Hamlet after the ghost had left, exclaims “O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!”  Thus, Hamlet’s imagination of the ghost may be a lapse in his perception of reality. In these moments where the ghost appears to him and only him, he is coping by escaping into a fantasy in which the ghost of his father guides him along his journey to revenge, yet this ghost seems to be only a creation by Hamlet. 


The transformation of the ghost from reality to a figment of Hamlet’s creation is signaled by Horatio’s warning to Hamlet. At the end of the scene, Hamlet’s friends are ardently endeavoring to convince Hamlet not to follow the ghost. Horatio’s appeal to Hamlet is loaded with foreboding omens: 


What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff…
…And there assume some other horrible form,
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
And draw you into madness? Think of it. 
The very place that puts toys of desperation, 
Without more motive, into every brain… (I:IV:73-76)

Horatio, describing the sea, is forewarning Hamlet of the danger of his imagination. For Hamlet, the loss of reason and faculty of brain would inhibit Hamlet from distinguishing the real world from the make believe. Though the ghost is real in this scene, there is a danger of the ghost to assume some other horrible form. Without the logic required to discern truth from fiction, Hamlet could be deprived his ability to distinguish the real ghost and the imagined one, which would lead to madness. Pertinently, Horatio declares when Hamlet exits the stage that “[Hamlet] waxes desperate with imagination.” Hamlet, following his own desperation, is choosing to descend into his own imagination. 


This imagination creates the interactions with the ghost that we have established are unlikely to occur based on the constraints set by the story. This genesis could have many sources. One notable explanation for Hamlet to imagine the dialogue with the ghost is the Oedipus complex. In Ernest Jones’ essay, “A Pyscho Analytic Study of Hamlet”, he writes that “the long ‘repressed’ desire to take his father’s place in his mother’s affection is stimulated to unconscious activity by the sight of someone usurping this place exactly as he himself longed to do.” Therefore, the ghost, for Hamlet, could have become a realization of his repressed feelings, one that was imagined to justify killing his uncle and marrying his mother―an action he unconsciously or consciously desires to carry out beforehand. Another explanation is political expediency. The alleged rightful heir mentioned in Margreta De Grazia’s essay, “Empires of World History”, required the legitimacy and moral justification from the people in order usurp the power from the king. Similarly, Hamlet requires justification to attain the power that, as the rightful heir, was usurped from him by his uncle. Therefore, by believing or at least making others believe that his uncle unnaturally murdered his father would facilitate Hamlet’s own seizure of power. There are numerous avenues of speculation on why exactly Hamlet begins to create the ghost, yet that exploration would require a much longer paper, and the lack of specificity does not endanger the essay’s claim.


However, some would claim that the ghost of King Hamlet exists outside of Hamlet’s imagination entirely and is an independent character.  They would claim that the differences found in the appearance of the ghost in the scene with Gertrude and in Scene I are non-important. Or they argue that Hamlet is acting mad when the ghost appears consciously. They may say that she is pretending not to hear the ghost or see the ghost. To counter this, I argue that if the Gertrude could yet interact with King Hamlet’s ghost then why doesn’t the ghost turn and directly address Gertrude. In the scene, the ghost, referring to Gertrude indirectly, speaks only to Hamlet. Thus, it is more likely that Gertrude cannot see or hear the ghost. However, the difference between the dress of the ghost is in fact acutely relevant. The ghost appears to be wearing his armor in the first interaction between Marcellus, Horatio, and Barnardo. Horatio says that “Such was the very armor he had on/When he the ambitious Norway combated;” (I:I:60-61). Thus, the ghost appears in Scene I and Scene IV of Act I in the exact same outfit when seen by Hamlet. Yet, in the scene with Gertrude, the ghost appears differently. 


Others would argue that there isn’t a clean transition from Scene IV to Scene V that would allow for the ghost to be different from the one in the previous scene. I argue that the ghost’s inability to speak in Scene I and IV must not be understated. On each occasion that the ghost was seen by Marcellus and Barnardo, why didn’t the ghost ask for them to bring Hamlet to him. If the ghost had the power of speech the entire time, then why does the ghost only speak to Hamlet? If it is to keep its identity a secret, then wouldn’t showing himself to people other than Hamlet give away the secret of his existence anyways. The argument that no other character speaks or hears the ghost is too strong to allow there not to be a clear difference to the ghost after Act I Scene IV. 


Furthermore, opponents would argue that even though the ghost comes four times at the same place and time, that does not mean that the ghost can’t exist in other locations and times. The ghost could be choosing to appear wherever and whenever because of habit or custom, but if it desired to, then could appear elsewhere. Although the ghost explicitly states to Hamlet that it is “doomed to walk the night/and for the day confined to fast in fires” (I:V:10-11), it doesn’t specify what exact time night is, nor does it mention that chained to a specific place. Therefore, it may be a coincidence that he appeared several days in a row, not a rule. Furthermore, the ghost could just be appearing at this place so that it could attract the attention of Hamlet’s friends, who would then bring Hamlet to it. Thus, it is neither a coincidence nor a rule, but a part of its’ thought-out plan which further implies the independent and intelligence of the ghost. 


However, if the ghost planned to appear several days in a row to attract the attention of Hamlet’s friends, with the end result of reaching Hamlet, but also had the ability to travel wherever it desired, then it would most logically seek out Hamlet, initially. Yet, instead of hastening to find the person most likely to achieve its goal, its’ distraught son, Hamlet, the ghost chose to repeatedly appear in the same place at the same time for months. 


The ghost holds a significant role in the play; however, throughout, the author is continually asking the reader to judge the legitimacy and truth of the ghost. Though some may argue that the ghost is a completely independent character, I believe that there is sufficient evidence to support that the ghost is indeed a figment of Hamlet’s imagination, which may be a result of his madness or his depression or something else entirely―that argument would require a longer paper. Thus, the final words of Hamlet echo his critical decision, “Go on. I’ll follow thee.” As the Hamlet exits the stage in Scene IV, he discards reality. The physical translation of Hamlet from the “proper” location mirrors his internal decision to deprive himself of reason; therefore, when it appears on stage at the “distant” place in Scene V, the ghost is no longer an independent character but most likely figment of Hamlet’s imagination originating from within. 


