---
title: Toppling New Democracies [Writing]
author: ''
date: '2018-05-20'
categories:
  - Writing
slug: toppling-new-democracies-writing
---

  In Civil Society and the Collapse of the Weimar Republic, Berman claims that a weak national government and a strong civil society facilitated Hitler’s rise and the downfall of the Weimar Republic. This claim contrasts with Putnam, and other neo- Tocquevillians, who argues that extensive participation in civil society is crucial to a healthy, functioning democracy. With respect to new democracies, her arguments are persuasive because she clearly establishes the dangers of societal fragmentation occurring from associational growth, for example either by socio-economic class or religion, in the absence of powerful political parties. This effect on any democracy, new or experienced, is extremely detrimental. However, the generalizability of her analysis is weakened by its derivation from a singular case study. Therefore, many particular factors or variables pertaining specifically to the Weimar Republic may hinder analogy.  The innate flaws of the German republic’s constitution, the economic pressure, and its political culture, among others, are factors that are specific to the Weimar Republic that may not be applicable to all new democracies, and weaken the generality of her arguments. 


  The fragmentation of society into smaller, more homogenous groups through associations further divides a state, which can lead to greater political chaos and prohibit agreement. Where Putnam argues that any mundane activity will foster democratic practices and ideals, Berman successfully describes the situation where associations do the opposite. She writes that “citizens looking for succor and support into civil society organizations, which were primarily organized along group lines rather than across them” . These segmented groups within society then turned to anti-establishment anti-democratic political parties more easily because of the grass-roots nature of their activist civil society. The weakened centrist parties were not able to maintain those disaffected with the political status quo, and lost power. Among new democracies around the world, particularly Sub-Saharan Africa, ethnic polarization is one of the main issues of conflict when forming government. In democracies, minority groups within such states must form civic organizations to advocate for their platform. The failure of political organizations or the conflict between them can lead to oppression or violence motivated by civic organizations active within communities. Yet, as seen in Berman’s essay, in the absence of effective political organization, the Germans of the Weimar Republic were not divided ethnically but by their socio-economic class and religion. Therefore, in any new democracy, there is a danger posed when center political parties lose the attention and support of its citizens. Frustration, anger, and dissatisfaction can be focused into civic society, and then taken advantage of by grassroots anti-establishment political forces. 
  
  
Universal suffrage, proportional representation without voter minimums, and the chancellor nomination clause were detrimental to the new democracy of the Weimar Republic. The constitution of the Weimar Republic was conducive to both the rise of a charismatic dictator and anti-establishment fringe political parties. The republic had a proportional representation electoral system that specified no minimum threshold of votes.  Without a minimum threshold, radical political parties such as the communists and the Nazi’s, although they received little support, were legitimized early on by admission into the Reichstag. Furthermore, this “proliferation of parties” forced governments to form minority coalitions that were short-lived and weak. Secondly, the republic decided on a semi-presidential system, where the president was directly elected by the people, but could nominate the chancellor as head of government. This created the opportunity for Hitler to gain power without being directly elected.  The elected President von Hindenburg, in an attempt to control Hitler’s ambitions, nominated him unilaterally for chancellor.  Soon after, Hitler dissolved the Weimar constitution and declared dictatorship over Germany. Lastly, Germany granted universal suffrage before both the United States and the UK , however it has been shown that large expansions of the electorate may in some cases harm new democracies. These glaringly obvious errors that were built into the constitution, initially condemned Germany’s political organizations to be sufficiently weak and disparate, and easily enabled complete power to be given unilaterally to a single charismatic individual. For other new democracies, avoiding these decisions when forming a constitution would greatly affect their success or failure independent of their respective participation of civic society. 


Germany’s political culture prior to the Weimar Republic consisted of autocratic nationalism, in conjunction with a military-industrial complex. The rise of Nazism and fall of democracy was facilitated by this past political culture and manipulated by Hitler.  After the unification of the German state by the Second Reich, Germany’s first national constitution “established an authoritarian monarchy with only the trappings of liberal democracy”.  First by Bismark and then by Kaiser Wilhelm II, Germany continued the “policy of rapid industrialization and imperialist expansion”.  Throughout this period, parts of German society embraced nationalism and anti-Semitism, which contributed to its “willingness to bring about World War I”.  After the war, the Weimar Republic formed, however the legacy of Germany’s political culture could not disappear overnight. Just as Bernard Lewis argues, in Islam and Liberal Democracy, that the Middle East struggles to overcome its “dominant political tradition” , the failure of the Weimar Republic is also indicative of Germany’s struggle to overcome its historic political tradition of nationalism and imperialism. “In 1928, the Nazi Party ran on a platform of militarism and anti-Semitism”.  Hitler’s appeals to militarist nationalism was equally associated with Germany’s political norm of strong autocratic leaders demanding devotion to the state.   O’Neil, Fields, Share (2018) write that “German intellectuals argued that individual freedom was a luxury or indeed a weakness not fit for the forging of German national identity”.  Therefore, when Berman ignores this aspect of German political culture when analyzing this case, civil society being the only dependent variable becomes more persuasive; however, when new democracies form, it is pertinent that leaders do not disregard their political tradition or legacy. 
The economic turmoil of the early twentieth century and the reparations from the Treaty of Versailles placed extreme strain on the Weimar Republic’s political and social institutions, which contributed to its downfall. Germany was burgeoned with billions of dollars of reparations from the Allied powers.  Hyperinflation and widespread unemployment, a consequence of the Great Depression, furthered the dire situation for the lower and middle class.   The weak political institutions were blamed for the problems plaguing the state and voters became dissatisfied with the establishment. Seeking solace elsewhere, citizens joined the Communist party and Nazi Party, increasing from 2% to 17% and 3% and 32% of the popular vote respectively.  These anti-establishment organizations promised solutions, albeit radical and violent, to the instability and economic crisis, whereas the weak moderate political parties were unable to retain those disaffected voters, leading to the new democracy’s downfall. 


Berman is persuasive when highlighting the relative danger posed by the fragmentation of a new democracy’s society. However, her argument becomes less general when applied to other states because of the many factors that affected or plagued the Weimar Republic. She mentions the economic instability, the Great Depression, the weakness of the Republic’s regime, and its political tradition; however, her focus on civic society in Germany as paramount to its downfall does not make her argument general enough to be applicable other new democracies. 
