---
title: Authoritarian Regimes and Democratization [Writing]
author: ''
date: '2018-06-30'
categories:
  - Writing
slug: authoritarian-regimes-and-democratization-writing
---

In Democracy’s Third Wave, Huntington discusses waves and reverse waves of democratization. Among the theoretical explanations for why waves occur, a regime’s loss of legitimacy, either democratic or authoritarian, seemed most generalizable and applicable. Historically, the inability of a state to provide for its citizens has inevitably resulted in state failure, leading to communist revolt in the Soviet Union, peasant uprising in China, fascist dictatorship in Germany, or democracy in Brazil. With respect to South Korea, Mexico and Russia, the most important independent variable that lead to either their democratization or return to authoritarianism was the economic turbulence that challenged the legitimacy of the regime. Another independent variable was the historic legacy of elections within Mexico and South Korea, and lack thereof in Russia. The establishment of direct presidential elections, albeit unfair and corrupt, were introduced much earlier to Mexico and South Korea than to Russia, the resulting political culture overtime affecting the strategies used to maintain regime legitimacy.


The economic turmoil experienced by Mexico, South Korea and Post-Soviet Russia unraveled the existing regime in each case, leading to a reversal of policy, leadership, and direction. In Mexico and South Korea, their respective authoritarian regimes gave way to more liberal democratic institutions. On the other hand, in the Soviet Union, the liberalizing market reforms and democratic norms fell to greater authoritarian control as a result of economic strain. 
The political dominance of the PRI in Mexico diminished under the economic crisis of the 1980s and mid 1990’s. This economic difficulty was first triggered by Mexico’s immense foreign debt, and later caused by “a sudden devaluation of Mexico’s currency, the peso”.  The illegitimacy of the PRI regime spread as their inability to solve their economic issues grew ever more obvious. Voter dissatisfaction was so great that the 1988 election of president Carlos Salinas de Gortari “was possible only through electoral fraud”.   The resulting popular outrage led to electoral system reforms that would end the dominance of PRI. 2Along with political reforms, the PRI president de la Madrid and Salinas shifted stances on economically.  They abandoned protectionism and state intervention and implemented neo-liberal economic reforms which further hurt the poorest Mexicans.  In the mid-nineties, “an estimated 70 percent of Mexicans fell below the official poverty line”.3 The failure of the PRI regime and the fallout of the economic turmoil incensed the Mexican voters. The contract between the Mexican people and PRI was built upon the promise of economic prosperity and political stability in exchange for power. Unable to provide the former, the PRI inevitably had to democratize Mexico, through greater electoral standards and eliminate fraud. This shift lead to the election of Vicente Fox of the PAN political party in 2000, the first democratically elected president of Mexico, and the removal of PRI from power after a decade of domination. 


The financial crisis of 1997 led to first peaceful transition between political parties in South Korea, and solidified Korea’s transition to a democracy. Hahm Chaibong writes ,in South Korea’s Miraculous Democracy, that “[t]he 1997 crisis showed that the authoritarian system was not only politically reprehensible but also economically inept”.  Therefore, the election of the opposition leader and dissident, Kim Dae Jung,  a rejection of the conservative and authoritarian political regime, was driven by people’s loss of faith in the regime to economically sustain economic prosperity. Economic and political reforms thus followed as the Korean electorate was more open to radical and new ideas.   For example, the acceptance and institutionalization of welfarism is a major reversal of ideology from the previous status quo. 5 The financial crisis was the crack in the Korean conservatism that facilitated the acceptance of a wider ideology, economic reform, and a peaceful transition of an opposition leader into power. 
Unlike the former cases, in Post-Soviet Russia its economic chaos began during a period of comparative economic and political liberalization. The ensuing fallout lead to the Russian people turning away from democracy to authoritarianism, specifically a strong man to restore economic prosperity and stability. President Yeltsin implemented shock therapy on the Russian economy, “rapidly dismantling central planning and freeing up prices”, which lead to astounding hyperinflation.   The resulting depression greatly reduced the country’s gross domestic product and stifled development. The results of this policy caused widespread unpopularity of Yeltsin. Moreover, when Putin came to power “[t]he government faced high rates of poverty, a great deal of inequality, the disproportionate power of the oligarchs, widespread corruption and organized crime, and an inefficient state”. Putin inherited a troubled economy and the people’s desire for change, thus his consolidation of political power along all levels of government was accepted in exchange for the restoration of Russia. The textbook states that “Whereas in the 1990s, democratic institutions and civic organizations were weak and poorly institutionalized, in the Putin era they have become effectively stifled” . The burgeoning, weak democracy of the 1990’s produced the economic conditions to which an authoritarian regime centered around Putin’s personality could form. 


In each of these cases, Mexico, South Korea, and Russia, economic downturns precipitated a transition to a new regime, one that implemented distinctively different policies. In Mexico and South Korea, establishment authoritarian regimes transitioned to greater democratization, by solidifying election integrity or introducing a wider range of ideology. In Russia, the beginnings of a new democracy were trampled by Putin, who re-established authoritarian domination over elections, government and civic society. In each case, the people of their respective countries felt dissatisfied by the economic turmoil and sought out solutions from the status quo in opposition leaders, parties, and policy. 
The necessity of elections was greater in South Korea and Mexico because of their historic place in their political culture, unlike that of post-Soviet Russia. In the Constitution of 1917 established regular elections to directly elect presidents, mayors, governors, and federal legislatures.  Over the next century, the Mexican people participated in the elections that provided PRI with relatively uncontested political power. “Under the PRI, regular elections were held for national, state and local offices, and opposition parties actively contested these elections”.  Although these elections were ,for the most part, decided before they began. The habit, process, and need for elections lead to Mexico’s eventually transition to a true democracy. Because the election of PRI president Salinas was only possible through election fraud, the regime had to reform its electoral system to remain in power. The PRI maintained its legitimacy through its elections because the people required and needed elections, due to its political significance. But the elections were widely viewed as corrupt for decades leading to dissatisfaction from citizens.  The reforms to the elections then led to the election of the opposition party leader Vicente Fox. Similarly, Korea directly elected their first president in the early 50s, establishing a historic political culture in which to attain complete legitimacy would require an election. After Park’s military coup, the reinstallation of elections were just as much a way of legitimizing his own regime, even though he “could free deploy the police, the army and the intelligence agency in the service of his campaign”.   However, in Russia, during the 20th century, the Soviet Union’s Politburo, an appointed body, controlled the decisions of the country. Only in the early 90s, Yeltsin was elected president of the Russian Soviet Socialist Republic, a newly created position.  Moreover, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, there was no lasting legacy of a democratic electoral process found in South Korea and in Mexico. Thus, the political culture of with regards to the expectation of elections trickles down to affect the transition to democratization or a reversal back to authoritarianism. 


Both of these factors, the economic downturns of the late 20th century and the establishment of elections were significant independent variables that facilitated the re-establishment of authoritarian regimes or the complete full and peaceful transition to a democracy. To combat the legitimacy issues caused by the economic downturns, the regimes actively sought to clean-up their electoral processes to maintain support from the people, the result was more fair elections leading to the opposition parties peaceful transition to power. However, in Russia, the lack of strong, historic necessity for elections expedited Putin’s ability to instead corrupt elections to maintain power, the opposite effect.  
