---
title: Obligation in the Revenge of Gaia and Silent Spring [Writing]
author: ''
date: '2018-11-29'
categories:
  - Writing
slug: obligation-in-the-revenge-of-gaia-and-silent-spring
---


There are many positions within environmental ethics. Each position has a different value-system, which determines one’s obligations towards the environment. Anthropocentrism and ecocentrism are two popular, broad sets of beliefs and value systems that generally differ in their obligations. Anthropocentrism is an ethical stance “that sees nature as of value merely as a means to the ends of human beings”, whereas ecocentrism is a stance that “sees all of nature as having inherent value” (Dictionary of Environment).  Although philosophers of both positions may advocate for similar (or even the exact same) actions with respect to the environment, their underlying motivations and obligations may be different. Yet, the terms anthropocentrism and ecocentrism, though helpful, may not perfectly describe one’s belief/value-systems. Like, environmental ethics itself, they are vague descriptors that roughly classify an ambiguous philosophy. Several factors contribute to environmental ethics’ ambiguity. Firstly, environmental ethics is relatively novel. Spawning from the environmental movement of the twentieth century, “contemporary environmental ethics only emerged as an academic discipline in the 1970’s” (Stanford). Secondly, its field of study can encompass or overlap with enumerable similar ethics, including development ethics, business ethics, biomedical ethics, agricultural ethics, etc (Attfield 15).  The author John Benson, in Environmental Ethics, even questions its legitimacy as a distinct discipline, indistinguishable from ethics itself (Benson).  Still, he defines an “environmentally informed ethics” as one that “takes full account that an individual organism, of whatever kind, is embedded within its environment” (Benson). By his definition, this individual organism must understand and consider its actions, for its actions will ineluctably affect its environment. How this organism chooses to act towards its environment and why, however, is another question. What obligations does this organism have concerning the environment? 


 The writers of Silent Spring and the Revenge of Gaia, Rachel Carson and James Lovelock respectively, both advocate for environmental action to protect the Earth. On first sight, these popular environmental authors assume fundamentally different ethical stances. In Silent Spring, Carson exposes the lethality of human-caused actions that harm humans and nature indiscriminately. She points out the interconnectedness of humans to the environment, focusing on the deaths of birds, salmon, deer, humans etc. that resulted from the irresponsible use of “biocides”. By comparison, Lovelock appears less concerned with individual life, human or otherwise, and more concerned with the survival of the human racethe preservation of Gaia a primary means to that end. In the Revenge of Gaia, Lovelock addresses the overwhelming threat of global warming, and presents solutions to the mitigation of climate change. Within the Revenge of Gaia, his attitudes towards nature seem revealedthat humans should protect Gaia because Gaia protects us. In this essay, I will argue that Carson’s and Lovelock’s positions constrain humanity to differing obligations; their respective positions advocate for certain organisms over others, blame different groups that “harm”, and prioritize means to achieve their environmental goals. Yet, to claim that one is strictly anthropocentric and the other eccentric is inherently problematic. By analyzing their popular works side by side, I hope to bring out the particular nuances that underscore the environmental ethical positions within Silent Spring and The Revenge of Gaia. Understanding the differences found within these works will equip environmentalists to better envision the different worlds that they project onto the future. With this clearer vision, environmentalists can more effectively communicate, not only the how, but also the underlying why, one should care about the Earth and one’s environment. 
 
 
The anecdote on the Sage Bush in Carson’s chapter “Earth’s Green Mantle” is a microcosm that exemplifies her ethical position found throughout Silent Spring. She describes the fragile relationship between the grouse and the sage that has slowly developed in the western plains. This relationship evolved through “long periods of trial and error”(64) that enables these two organisms to live in a “place of harsh extremes of climate”(64) and support other organisms. In her opinion, this relationship is sacred. Humanity’s attempt to manipulate this environment to its own advantage is not reconcilable within her ethical position. Carson argues that because the environment is the way it is, justifies the obligation to maintain the environment’s fundamental structure. She writes that “the natural landscape [of the sage bush] is eloquent of the interplay of forces that have created it…we [humans] can read why the land is what it is, and why we should preserve its integrity” (64).  She ends this quote with a claim to moral responsibility. Humans ought to “preserve its integrity” because we can understand the “interplay of forces that have created it”. 
On the other hand, in the chapter, “Chemicals, Food and Raw Materials”, Lovelock addresses the problems put forward in Carson’s Silent Spring, but from a position with differing obligationsobligations that seem anthropocentric. He appears to disagree with her belief that the environment is precious, something to be preserved because of moral obligation. Lovelock, instead, is selective. His obligations are different than those that Carson holds. There are only certain organisms or parts of the environment that ought to be preserved. The basis for this selection is each organism’s utility to humans. He criticizes Carson saying curtly that “it is only human to be concerned with the welfare of fancy birds and cuddly animals…but these are like the dandies of our own civilization” (111).  His tone is demeaning. First, he diminishes their legitimacy and devalues “fancy” and “cuddly” animals from having obligatory importanceuse of the word dandies implying these animals are superfluous. Then, he distinctly separates humanity, “our own civilization”, from the rest of the environment. These statements conflict with the Carson’s position on obligation to the environment and align with an ethic that “claims that only human beings are morally considerable in their own right” (Internet 3). Lovelock provides his criteria for utility, and therefore obligation to preserve: organisms that “keep Gaia going” can be protected. In his opinion, the micro-organisms, the fungi, the worms, the molds and the trees (111) are the organisms that ought to be preserved not based on their intrinsic value but their extrinsic use. Lovelock’s ethical position is illuminated by his argument over which aspects of the environment humans should be obligated to save and which are unimportant. 


Although both of these authors have facets that can be interpreted as either ecocentric or anthropocentric, greater analysis can elucidate that their positions are not strictly one or the other. The chapter, “The Human Price”, draws attention Carson’s concern for humanity. In this chapter, she works to establish a moral obligation on humanity to not poison itself. She achieves this effect by ominously describing the insecticides that humans use as, though effective, dangerous and harmful to humans. Carson brings humanity to the forefront of her popular science work about the environment, emphasizing that biocide use is a human problem. She begins the chapter by pointing to the “hazards” introduced by man in the Industrial Age that heretofore did not exist. And then goes on to detail the horrific effects of DDT and other organic phosphates on the human body. For example, she writes about the British experimenter who applied DDT to his skin and hadn’t recovered within a year, suffering from body aches, insomnia, and anxiety (193). She condemns the usage of these chemicals, stating that the suffering of human life is a “heavy price to pay” (198). Carson is thus proscribing a value judgement, an obligation that humanity should not use these biocides because they harm humans. This obligation can be interpreted as anthropocentric or ecocentric depending on how one analyzes the motivations. Ecocentrists can argue that Carson is including humanity within the philosophical definition of the environment, and therefore basing her obligations to protect humanity as ecocentric. Within this chapter there is textual evidence to support this claim. She writes that “Man, however much he may like to pretend the contrary, is part of nature.” (188) Therefore, if she is bundling humanity within the sphere of nature/the environment, then her obligation to avert the suffering of humanity is simply an extension of her obligation to protect nature. 


However, anthropocentrists could argue otherwise. They could argue that Carson’s obligations to protect the environment are predominantly human-centered at its fundamental level. Besides the chapter, “The Human Price”, Carson, throughout Silent Spring, brings her focus back to humanity and how it will be affected. For example, in the chapter, “Rivers of Death”, she details the destruction of the fish wildlife caused by the spraying of insecticides. Eventually, she takes the spotlight away from the fish and directs our attention to humanity. Not only is are pesticide spraying a problem for the fish, but “this a problem that concerns a great many people. Some 25 million Americans look to fishing as a major source a recreation” (139).  Anthropocentrists could argue that Carson presenting an obligation to save animal life for the sake of human recreation reveals the human-centeredness within Silent Spring.  Moveover, within this chapter, Carson further presents a metaphorical anchor for anthropocentrists to grasp onto. She warms humans that they might end up like the robins, which “did not die as a direct result of the spraying of DDT” (151). But because the earthworms that they ate were “concentrated the pesticide in their tissues” (151). Anthropocentrists can then determine that the basis of her obligation to end the spraying of DDT, which poisons and kills, other wildlife, is not to only protect wildlife, but because Carson believes that the DDT will concentrate in animals’ tissues, which will poison and kill humanity. Although this reasoning appears circular and subjective, there are other examples that anthropocentrists can point to, to argue their stance that Carson’s obligations are human-centered. The analysis of Rachel Carson’s work, Silent Spring, from multiple ethical perspectives shows that there can exist within these texts a spectrum of motivations and ideas that sum Lovelock’s and Carson’s ethical positions. There is nuance within these works, and environmental ethics, that make it difficult to label the underlying motivations of ethical obligation to the environment. The obligations that these authors put upon humanity, and how that determines the future of the planet is a much more important distinction between the books. 


Since the publication of Silent Spring, half a century ago, significant change resulted from her efforts. A sweeping wave of concern gripped the American public, which led to pressure put on all levels of government. In the 1970’s, Congress passed environmental regulations that cleaned our air and our water from pollutionforming the Environmental Protection Agency to execute these policies. Special interest’s groups sprouted up to tackle large and small issues that defined the early environmental movement. There was a definitive enthusiasm felt by civic society to mitigate our effects on the environment. Lovelock, on the other hand, addresses a much different audience with a drastically more complex issue. While Carson may have captivated her audience with appeals to an ethical obligation to protect the environment, is Lovelock’s ethical position more appropriate for the present day? Lovelock’s position does not constrain humanity to an obligation to other life, unlike Carson. The environmental issues of the 1970’s consisted of pollution and wildlife loss. The environmental issues of today are mass flooding, famine, refugee crises, and war. When facing the annihilation of the human race, can humanity truly be as concerned about the oak as it is itself? Lovelock’s position allows humanity to operate under any means necessary to achieve their end: survival. That means that humanity must ask if hare or the robin or the sage brush is significant enough in the greater scheme of humanity’s goal. Unbridled by the obligations of other living things, humans would be able to use any solution to mitigate global warming. This may be humanity’s only hope. Under the obligations Carson proscribes, humans may not be able to move decisively to slow warming. Humanity would be obligated to guarantee that it does not harm other life in the process. But by moving too cautiously, so that we protect other life, global warming could even cause worldwide ecological shifts that eliminate these other organisms despite humanity’s concern. It will do well for readers to ask themselves which approach will save us from this imminent danger. 
