---
title: The Ethics of Documentary Construction in Grizzly Man [Writing]
author: ''
date: '2018-10-01'
categories:
  - Writing
slug: the-ethics-of-documentary-construction-in-grizzly-man-writing
---


[1] All film is constructed, purposefully designed by its makers. Documentaries are no different. Though their essential partscharacters, events, wordsare based in reality, they are equally created. Patricia Aufderheide writes, in Documentary Film: A Very Short Introduction, that documentaries are “portraits of real life, using real life as their raw material, constructed by artists and technicians who make myriad decisions about what story to tell to whom and for what purpose” (2). Yet, documentaries are received differently. The audience expects documentaries, unlike other film, to present the facts. Aufderheide claims that “viewers expect not to be tricked and lied to”(3). The audience assumes that these facts will inevitably illuminate the truth. However, the construction necessary to make documentaries complicates this assumption. Film makers have debated over the extent to which documentaries ought to be constructed since documentary’s inception (Aufderheide 2). Several styles and forms continually emerge and are defined over time. For example, in “On Truth, Objectivity, and Partisanship: The Case of Micheal Moore”, Douglas Keller classifies documentaries into two groups: those that are openly “partisan” and those claiming objectivity (59).  The former explicitly allows the film makers’ construction, biases, and decision to be seen by the audience. The latter attempts to limit manipulation and construction by the film maker, letting the raw footage speak for itself. Still, either group is inherently subjective because, as Emile de Antonio says, choice of subject matter, framing and editing create the construct containing the film maker’s biases (60). Thus, the film maker must navigate the tension between the audience’s expectation of the truth and his or her construction and presentation of documentary subjects and events. The gray, nebulous discipline of documentary ethics seeks to address this tension, to prevent the film maker from misrepresenting his subjects and deceiving the audience. 


[2] The film maker, Werner Herzog, straddles this blurry boundary of documentary ethics when making his films. Yet understanding his beliefs, philosophies, and intentions, help illuminate his motivations and goals as a film maker.  His manifesto, The Minnesota Declaration, is a twelve-point renunciation of cinema verité, a documentary philosophy also called observational cinema. Cinema verité is a philosophy that attempts to limit authorial and artistic manipulations, an ideology Herzog rejects. This form or style would be classified by Douglas Kellner as “claiming objectivity”. Herzog and his films are unabashedly a part of the group Kellner defines as “openly partisan”. In his first point, Herzog states that cinema verité “reaches a merely superficial truth, the truth of accountants” (Ames ix). In a speech following a screening of his film, Lessons of Darkness, Herzog expounds upon the tenets laid out in the “Minnesota Declaration”. He asks “How important, really, is the Factual?” He answers himself, saying that it can’t be disregarded as irrelevant. Nevertheless, the Factual will “never give us the kind of illumination, the ecstatic flash, from which Truth emerges” (Weigal). Thus, merely presenting the facts about the subjects Herzog films are of less interest, less consequence to him. A simple retelling, about how events occurred or who people are, is deemed banal. The greater pursuit is to manipulate, through “fabrication and imagination and stylization”, the factual to achieve the “ecstatic truth”. But what specifically is this ecstatic truth? From his speech and his declaration, “ecstatic truth” is described ambiguously, ever-ethereal, but dependent upon the film’s subject. 


 [3] In Werner Herzog’s documentary, Grizzly Man, the subject, Timothy Treadwell, until his death, filmed himself living with grizzly bears in Alaska for thirteen summers. His expeditions into the wilderness were meant to raise awareness to their plight. While he lived, Treadwell gained widespread publicity and used his recordings to teach children about grizzly bears and nature. In Grizzly Man, Herzog reconstructs the man Treadwell from over one hundred hours of self-documented found footage. Interviews from his family, friends and associates provide supplementary material, completing the construction of the subject Treadwell. Eric Ames writes, in Ferocious Reality, that all the elements within Grizzly Man work to authentic and verify Herzog’s “personal vision of the natural world as brutally indifferent to human existence” (Ames 250). Thus, there is evidence that through Grizzly Man and the construction of the subject Treadwell, Herzog attempts to uncover what he believes is the “ecstatic truth” about man and nature, but in this process, does Herzog disregard the well-being of his subject, Treadwell, or deceive the audience? In this essay, I will analyze Herzog’s construction of Treadwell in Grizzly Man as a foil to his own beliefs, but weakened because the subject cannot respond. I will determine to what extent does Herzog’s “fabrication and imagination and stylization” strip the subject’s, Treadwell’s, agency and deceive the audience. What are these ethical implications and why do they matter? 
 
 
[4] Herzog presents this “ecstatic truth” by constructing Treadwell as a foil. The manipulation of found footage, editing, and narration alert the audience to the contrasting and often juxtaposed views on nature. There are scenes where this effect is more pronounced, but also scenes that more artfully convey Herzog’s view. An example where Herzog more subtly creates this effect occurs early in the film, when Herzog introduces the audience to the more profound significance of Grizzly Man. He says that beyond the wildlife film there was a “story of astonishing beauty and depth”, “a film of human ecstasies and darkest inner turmoil” (4:10).  He continues, saying that “Treadwell reached out, seeking a primordial encounter. But in doing so, he crossed an invisible borderline” (4:28). Herzog’s words are authoritative, carrying the finality and definitiveness of fact. The connotation of the word “borderline” impresses upon the audience that the subject Treadwell was trespassing by reaching out. The subject’s attempts to cross into the world of the grizzly bears violated some “invisible” yet conclusive natural law. The dramatic event that occurs in the next shot emphasizes and clarifies Herzog’s meaning to the audience. The sounds, both non-diegetic and diegetic, and the Herzog crafts this scene help impress this meaning. Throughout this scene, light hearted non-diegetic mood music plays underneath Herzog’s narration and Treadwell’s diegetic voice. As Treadwell teases the smaller bear with his finger, the audience begins to imagine the grizzly bears to be under his control. The violent imagery of grizzly bears in popular culture starts to contrast with the one presented. Treadwell’s soft appeals to “go back and play” are reminiscent to how the audience interacts with their pets at home. What is the difference? The shot changes and the larger grizzly bear approaches. Then, abruptly, shockingly, the music cuts out as Treadwell gasps out loud in surprise (4:51). The camera shakes, so the audience cannot see what happened, but Treadwell’s deep exhale tells the audience enough: Herzog, the deep-voiced, assertive narrator was right. The dramatic climax of this scene encapsulates the two viewpoints of nature, the subject Treadwell’s and the film-maker Herzog’s, at odds. The construction of the subject Treadwell as a trespasser that crosses the “invisible borderline” defined by Herzog establishes this juxtaposition. And in this scene, the manipulation of found footage with editing, non-diegetic mood music and narration is the “fabrication and imagination and stylization” that Herzog utilizes throughout Grizzly Man to convey this disparity, illuminating what believes is the “ecstatic truth”. 


[5] However, a more explicit example where the subject Treadwell is constructed as a juxtaposition to the filmmaker’s, Herzog’s view, occurs near the end of the film. At (1:36:00), the scene opens with Huguenard and a large bear, presumably the bear that might have killed both Treadwell and Huguenard, in the center of the shot. The camera zooms in on the face of the bear, while Huguenard ducks out of the frame; Herzog’s narration, the only voice heard, dominates the audience’s attention. He says: 

And what haunts me, is that in all the faces of all the bears that Treadwell ever filmed, I discover no kinship, no understanding, no mercy. I see only the overwhelming indifference of nature. To me, there is no such thing as a secret world of the bears. And this blank stare speaks only of a half-bored interest of food. But for Timothy Treadwell, this bear was a friend, a savior. (1:37:15)

Unlike the example in the former paragraph, this is an explicit declaration by the filmmaker to establish that the subject’s, Treadwell’s, beliefs run opposite to his own. Herzog’s construction of the relationship between nature and man has been evidenced through how he shows Treadwell interact with bears, as seen in the last example, and finally after constructing that throughout the film, he states the two opposing visions of nature: his own and what he believes Treadwell’s is. In his words, he believes that the bears Treadwell filmed, and nature generally, does not have the capacity for “kinship” or “understanding” or “mercy”. These attributes are human concepts created to describe human capacities to interact with other humans. The subject, Treadwell, is shown throughout the film, anthropomorphizing, or attributing these concepts to, the animals around him, to nature. For example, during the scene where the subject, Treadwell, pets Timmy the fox. Treadwell says that “you can see the bond that developed between” the Timmy the fox and himself (37:07). For a bond to develop between Treadwell and the fox, and any other animal he claims to bond with in the film, then “kinship”, “understanding”, and “mercy” are necessary requisites. What Herzog is declaring, in a sense, is that this bond does not exist. Nature, or bears, do not have the capacity to build these bonds with humans. Thus, the “secret world of bears” that the subject, Treadwell, has claimed to access also does not exist. Nature, these bears, Timmy the fox, are “overwhelmingly indifferent” to our (to Treadwell’s) attempts to bond with them. “But for Timothy Treadwell, this bear was a friend, a savior.” These final words are laced with implied meaning. By explicitly stating the conflict, the clash, the juxtaposition between his views and the subject’s, Treadwell, Herzog established a debate. It appears as if there are two sides, who see the world differently, but only one person can be right. Herzog’s words are framed as if the subject Treadwell is deluded, but the filmmaker, Herzog, can see through the veil of misguided anthropomorphism. Where Treadwell sees a “friend, a savior”, Herzog sees the truth, the estatic truth, that, in fact, all there is in the bear’s face is “a blank stare speaks only of a half-bored interest of food”. 


[6] Herzog’s decision to construct Treadwell as a foil to himself is uniquely problematic. The subject, Treadwell, was a conscious, purposeful filmmaker and actor within his own footage, but his construction is completely controlled by Herzog. Therefore, it appears as if there is a dialogue or debate between two opposing ideas, between the man, Timothy Treadwell, and the filmmaker, Werner Herzog; however, the audience is in fact viewing something much more layered, complicated, and nuanced. The aspects of subject presentation and representation within documentary form that affect this phenomenon must be discussed. Treadwell directed and, more obviously at times, performed in his extensive video-recording. Herzog acknowledges this aspect of Treadwell, saying that “as a film maker he was methodical. Often repeating takes fifteen times” (38:40). In the following scene, Treadwell says to himself, as if a director was speaking to an actor: “Do one more really short, excellent take.” The actor responds back, pointing to the camera (and the director), “This will be the motherfucker!” (38:48). In Grizzly Man, the complexity of self-presentation in documentary, discussed in Bill Nichols’ Introduction to Documentary, becomes more sophisticated. Nichols writes that documentaries are about real people that play or present themselves, unlike in fiction where actors play characters (8). But in the found footage of Grizzly Man, Treadwell is both a subject and an actor. Throughout Treadwell’s video recordings, he is both playing himself and performing a role. His intended film, the audience will never see. Thomas Austin comments, in “‘…To Leave the Confinements of His Humanness’”, that it is never clear how much of what he filmed was meant for private use or a public media project (52).  Instead, over one hundred hours of self-directed film by the subject were consumed and reconstructed to convey another film maker’s aesthetic and artist biases. Austin dubs this phenomenon dual authorship (53). And he argues that this dual authorship is unequal, directly affecting how the audience views each author and their ideas (54). For example, he writes that Herzog’s selection of Treadwell’s footage, non-diegetic impositions, and interviews (i.e. “fabrication and imagination and stylization”) is opinionated, authoritative, subjective, and grounded in personal experience (54).  But these decisions “frame those made by Treadwell (the filmmaker)” (54). The “privileging of Herzog’s voice”, because Treadwell cannot critique Herzog’ commentary (54), overshadows Treadwell’s voice, while maintaining the façade of dual authorship. A scene that exemplifies this effect occurs when Treadwell is presented ranting about the how the government has failed to protect the bears (1:24:00). The Park Service takes the brunt of his ire. However, as he continues his tirade against the Park Service, Herzog decides to mute Treadwell’s diegetic voice, and provide his own voice over. He says that “Now Treadwell crosses a line with the Park Service, which we will not cross. He attacks the individuals for with whom he worked for 13 years” (1:24:42). Though, this may be the reason that Herzog decides to silence Treadwell’s voice, the effect is more harmful. Herzog figuratively steps in and decides that audience must accept his interpretation of the scene. Instead of Treadwell telling his own story with his own words, as he intended to do if he decided to release this footage, Herzog constructs how the audience ought to see this scene. As Treadwell screams profanity and violently gesticulates at the camera, Herzog, with judicious assurance, proclaims that “It is clear to me that the Park Service is not Treadwell’s real enemy. There is a larger, more implacable adversary out there” (1:25:11).  Although it may be “clear” to Herzog, this is only his interpretation, his understanding, his construction of the found footage that he is using in this scene. He completely manipulates the footage to present his own perspective about Treadwell, but present it as fact or reality to the audience. In this scene, Treadwell is silenced, but seen. The dual authorship combined with Herzog’s unconstrained intent to manipulate the subject, Treadwell cause the audience to believe that what they see on film, the construction of Treadwell, is indeed the man, Treadwell. 
[7] In “What to Do About Documentary Distortion? Toward a Code of Ethics”, Bill Nichols writes that a “code of documentary ethics must focus on protecting the well-being of both film subjects and actual viewers” (2) but, more importantly, that this ethical standard is open-ended. The contemporary community of film makers, critics, scholars, audiences, etc., are responsible for determining documentary ethical standards (Nichols 9). By using Herzog’s Grizzly Man as a case study, I hope to contribute to this flexible, growing body of commentary through my exploration of the ethical implications when manipulation and construction may harm a documentary’s subject. Nichols emphasizes the power imbalance between the subject and the film maker (3), and introduces the “ethical dilemmas of representing [those] who may not be able to represent themselves” (5).  In this case, the subject cannot respond to the film maker’s presentation, not because he lacks the money or influence necessary, but because he is dead. Thus, under Nichol’s definition, Herzog must take great care to protect the well-being of his subject, Treadwell, because he is ultimately powerless. However, this may not be Herzog’s prerogative. Throughout the film, Herzog constructs Treadwell as a foil to present what he believes is an “ecstatic truth” about nature and man. By manipulating the non-diegetic and diegetic sounds and providing his own voice overs, he constructs his own ideology, perceptions, and beliefs on top of the subject. But the “alleged” dual authorship of the Grizzly Man complicates how the audience discerns between the man, Timothy Treadwell, Herzog’s construction of the subject, Treadwell, and Herzog himself. Herzog routinely intercedes to argue against what he believes Treadwell’s stance is. But Herzog controls and determines the framing of this argument. Treadwell cannot respond, clarify or critique this construction. Thus, in the process of discovering his own “ecstatic truth”, Herzog taking advantage of his subject Treadwell. Should this be allowed under documentary ethics? Nichols would argue that it should not. But what if, the film is not a documentary? Herzog, himself, has said that he doesn’t draw a line between documentary and drama, saying it is “all storytelling of one kind or another” (Knight). But believing that one’s film isn’t a documentary doesn’t alleviate one’s burden of protecting his subjects and minimizing manipulation. The ethical implications of Herzog’s decisions apparent in Grizzly Man hopefully will influence contemporary film makers and expand upon current interpretations of documentary ethics.
