---
title: The New Deal and the “Green” New Deal [Writing]
author: ''
date: '2018-12-01'
categories:
  - Writing
slug: the-new-deal-and-the-green-new-deal-writing
---


Introduction

In this essay, I will explore a concept I have named a sociopolitechnical imaginary, by comparing the New Deal and the “Green” New Deal. This analysis is framed by Sheila Jasanoff and Sang-Hyun Kim’s article “Containing the Atom: Sociotechnical Imaginaries and Nuclear Power in the United States and South Korea”. Authors, Jasanoff and Kim, define “imaginaries” not as political agendas, nor simply master narratives, but as “instrumental and futuristic” (123). They write that “[imaginaries] project visions of what is good, desirable, and worth attaining for a political community” (123). President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s (FDR) New Deal (ND) successfully seized upon public sentiment and national urgency to instill a novel, radical socio-political imaginary: a future where federal government economic intervention is re-imagined as a “desirable” societal “good”. But the state did not establish this imaginary by itself. Burgeoning mass movements, called “social justice” movements by contemporaries (Edsforth 201), made the protection of millions of poor, retired, and struggling working people not simply an economic imperative, but also a social justice necessity. In comparison, the emergent and ambiguous platform, dubbed the “Green” New Deal (GND), expands upon the socio-political imaginary implemented during the 1930’s, but attaches a technical directivemandating that the federal government (or governments) invest in carbon-zero, green technologies and provide subsidies to renewable energy industries. Similarly, the threat of global warming, pollution and other environmental issues has given rise to environmental justice movements that seek to re-envision the federal government’s role in protecting America’s poorest from their disproportionate effects. Thus, proponents of the GND seek a sociopolitechnical imaginary in which the federal government actively intervenes to protect the American public from socio-economic and environmental issues, to reform the political system, and to redefine our technological future. What factors permitted the ND’s imaginary to take hold? And could the GND achieve analogous success?  A historical, comparative analysis of the ND and the GND offers ample opportunity to explore these questions. 

The New Deal

In 1929, the Great Crash was a period of stock price decline on the New York Exchange, where, on paper, investors lost more than fifteen billion dollars (Edsforth 17). For the next two years, stock prices would continue to fall (Edsforth 17). However, Edsford writes that the Great Crash was “more a catalyst than a cause of the Great Depression” (18). He argues that the underlying economic flaws of the New Era, such as the shifts in construction investment and automobile manufacturing (21), the absence of markets for American exports (25), the international monetary system (27), etc., caused the sustained economic downturn. Though the causes of the Great Depression are numerous and polemic, the effects are more pertinent to this paper’s topic. The fallout led to a psychologically and materially ravaged American society. For example, although official estimates of unemployment widely cite that one-quarter of the work force was unemployed in 1932 and 1933, Edsforth believes that forty percent unemployment during that winter seems more accurate (79). Millions were psychologically depressed (Edsforth 81) and about one-sixth of the total US population were at risk of starvation (Edsforth 85). During the Great Depression, the American public experienced a traumatic reckoning that disputed prevailing socio-economic ideology. In the 1920’s, most Americans believed that the New Era economy, in which businesses are not regulated but assisted by the government, would produce the best results for all Americans (Edsforth 13). Yet, the election of FDR in 1932, the Great Depression in full swing, showcased the shift in public opinion regarding the federal government’s responsibilities to the public. The incumbent presidential candidate, Republican Herbert Hoover, and the former New York Governor, Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt, campaigned on diametrically opposed socio-economic ideologies.  Edsforth writes that President Herbert Hoover consistently resisted the idea that the federal government had to provide direct aid to unemployed workers and their families (52).  Whereas, FDR “long believed” that the government was obligated to provide future economic development and social welfare (Edsforth 53). FDR’s election in 1932, and again in 1936, were heralded as a referendum on the ND’s progressive reforms that established a socio-political imaginary in which the federal government rigorously acted to support the public. The successes of ND programs, such as the Civilian Conservation Corp (which provided jobs to two million young men), helped cement this imaginary. But the desperation and psychological trauma from the Great Depression were the prime catalysts of the ideological shift that led to FDR’s election and subsequent reforms.  

The “Green” New Deal?

In 2008, the financial crisis, precipitated by America’s largest banks, spiraled into the worst recession in almost eighty years (The Economist). Although regulators, ratings agencies, central banks, and consumers all accrue blame, the Great Recession in the United States was instigated by irresponsible big banks securitizing subprime loans for home mortgages into collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) (The Economist).  These financial securities were highly valued for their alleged low risk, but were dependent on the housing market. The real estate boom turned into a bust and the failure of the US housing market caused a chain reaction that sunk global financial institutions, threatening the collapse of the economy (The Economist). In effect, the financial crisis sent shockwaves throughout the world. Out of the chaos, the “Green” New Deal began to be formulated as the solution to the “triple crisis” facing the world. Ahmet Atıl Aşıcı and  Zeynep Bünül, in “Green New Deal: A Green Way out of the Crisis?”, define this “triple crisis” as the economic, social and ecological challenges in the post-recession world. Whereas, the Great Recession only brought forth social and economic crises, the world now had to contend with “food and energy insecurities and climate change” as paramount imperatives (Aşıcı and Bünül). The United States appeared to be at the forefront of this movement. President Barack Obama campaigned to revolutionize U.S. energy and climate change policy, but the economic turmoil of the financial crisis shifted his priority to economic recovery (Collina and Poff 1). In their article, “The Green New Deal: Energizing the U.S. Economy”, Tom Z. Collina und Erica Poff write that President Obama “instead made energy the centerpiece of his economic recovery plan (1). They cite that President Obama directed 15%, or $120 billion, of his stimulus package, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA), to clean energy and creating green jobs (1). President Obama’s stimulus package was the largest in U.S. history, and the Office of the Press Secretary, in a 2016 release, stated that the Recovery Act was the single largest investment in clean energy in history (White House). 

SocioPoliTechnical Imaginaries

Similar to the ND, Obama’s ARRA alleviated economic and social pressure on the American public. The Obama Administration Council of Economic Advisors states in their report, “the Economic Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009”, that the trajectory of the economy changed significantly, GDP grew by an additional 2.7%, and millions of jobs were saved (Council). As of 2018, the Financial Times US economy statistics showcase that US GDP has soared past pre-crisis levels and unemployment has reached as low as 3.7% (Financial Times). The socio-political imaginary set by the ND enabled the Obama administration to take drastic federal action to solve socio-economic issues during the crisis. More revealing of the ND’s precedent, this imaginary influenced all political candidates running in the 2008 presidential election. Party affiliation did not determine one’s opinion on the federal government’s obligation to support the public in an economic crisis. In an interview, journalist Michael Grunwald says that Mitt Romney, who attained the Republican party’s nomination, in fact had the biggest stimulus package out of all the candidates (Roberts). Thus, this socio-political imaginary is ubiquitous, immune to partisanship. But why hasn’t the sociopolitechnical imaginarythat the federal government is also obligated to protect the public from environmental/ecological harmintroduced by President Obama in the ARRA, taken hold? I argue that both the public and the state must construct this sociopolitechnical imaginary in coordination. In the ND, President FDR responded to the public’s demand for socio-economic federal government intervention. However, with President Obama’s stimulus package, the public was largely unware of the technical directive hidden within, and demanded only a socio-economic solution built into the current imaginary. To be reductionist, I believe an alteration of a popular quote will help communicate this claim. Famously, Henry Ford once said that “If [he] had asked people what they wanted, they would have said faster horses.” Although that may be true for automobiles, to construct a lasting sociopolitechnical imaginary, I argue that the state must ask for what people want, then give it to them. 

The Public Must Ask 

The Great Depression and the Financial Crisis of 2008 significantly impacted the economic and social well-being of the American public. Its effects were direct, visible and actionable. Thus, the public demanded, from the federal government, alleviationspending, programs, a safety netand reframed this government relief as social justice. In comparison, the ecological and environmental impacts of global warming are more inconspicuous. The public’s awareness of future repercussions, and their significance, from greenhouse gas emissions and climate change has historically been limited. A report, published in 2007, compiled over twenty years of polling on public opinion about global warming, offers insights to the public’s lack of awareness on this issue. In 1986, only 39% of the public reported having “heard or read anything about the greenhouse effect” (Nisbet and Myers). This number slowly increased over twenty years, due to greater media coverage, to top 90% in 2006 (Nisbet and Myers).  But this poll only suggests that 90% of the American public is aware of the phenomenon “greenhouse effect” in 2006. How many believe that this phenomenon is even real? Or that the “greenhouse effect” is so important that the federal government should intervene to combat it? A Gallup poll in 2006 surveyed 1,000 Americans and asked them: “Do you think that global warming will pose a threat to you or your way of life in your lifetime?” 35% of respondents replied “Yes”, but 62% of respondents replied “No” (Nisbet and Myers). Thus, the American public, only two years prior to the Financial Crisis, was aware of the phenomenon, the “Greenhouse effect”, but predominantly believed that global warming was not a critical issue necessitating immediate and unparalleled government intervention. The socio-economic crisis took precedence over the environmental, and even though, President Obama’s ARRA included unprecedented levels of federal investment and support, the sociopolitechnical imaginary did not persist. It has not taken hold over our present political consciousness that the federal government must act aggressively to mitigate global warming. The current administration and Republicans, in general, oppose government intervention that aids the transition to a carbon-zero economy. Like the New Deal in the 1930’s, the ideology of “Green” New Deal is still partisan. For example, a New York Times article analyzing the House and Senate versions of the Republican tax bill (now passed) declared that its provisions could “hobble the United States’ renewable energy industry” while “bolstering older energy sources like oil and gas production” (Plumer and Tankersley). The federal government is, in fact, actively seeking ways to reduce support for renewables/green energy, and heralding the return of clean coal and frenzied fracking. 


Social Justice as Environmental Justice 

As seen in the polls cited above, the public has become increasingly aware of the phenomenon, the “greenhouse gas effect”, but historically, has been somewhat nonchalant about the immediacy of global warming. However, emerging environmental movements have worked to inform the public and reframe federal government intervention against climate change as environmental justice. For example, in an unprecedented law suit, twenty-one teenagers have sued the federal government because “it has violated the youngest generation’s constitutional rights to life, liberty, and property, as well as failed to protect essential public trust resources” (Our Children’s Trust). They claim that the federal government is causing “irreparable harm to young people and denying them a safe climate” by knowingly implementing policies that contribute to climate change (Irfan). “As relief, they want the government to pursue policies to keep warming in check” (Irfan). The court case, JULIANA v. U.S, was filed in 2015 and despite persistent legal pressure from the U.S. Justice Department awaits a trial date (Our Children’s Trust). Therefore, similar to the New Deal’s social justice groups, today’s environmental groups seek to establish groundbreaking obligations on the federal government. By aligning the constitutional right to “life, liberty and property” with the rights to a clean, safe environment, protected from climate change, this environmental group has linked environmental justice to the United States’ most binding document.  By involving the Supreme Court, which denied the Trump administration’s application for stay (Our Children’s Trust), this group has brought this issue into the public’s consciousness. These movements draw analogous parallels between each other, and I believe that this component is important to facilitating a new imaginary.    


Conclusion

In the wake of the Great Depression, the perceived threat of social, economic, and political upheaval enabled President Franklin D. Roosevelt to pass fundamentally radical legislation. Yet, social security pensions, unemployment benefits, farm subsidies, and other reforms in the New Deal were overwhelmingly unpopular prior to the Great Depression. Most Americans, by 1928, believed that private investors and unregulated markets would continue to improve rising living standards and increase leisure time (Edsforth 12). Nevertheless, the fallout from economic turmoil shifted the public’s views and placed the onus on the government to intervene in an unprecedented fashion. Thus, the Great Depression caused a re-imagining of federal government’s socio-economic and political role in America. The “Green” New Deal, conceived during the Financial Crisis, now touted by Democratic progressives, seeks to once again redefine the federal government’s role in American affairs. Proponents believe the existential threat of global warming necessitates government intervention to mitigate climate change and protect America’s poorest people. The “Green” New Deal seeks to build upon the lasting legacy of the New Deal by providing an economic safety-net, through universal access to health care and federally sponsored job security; however, unlike the ND, the GND mandates that the federal government invest in carbon-zero, green technologies and provide subsidies to renewable energy industries. This is the sociopolitechnical imaginary that would alter future decision-making of the state and the normative demands of the public. Although President Barrack Obama attempted to achieve this unprecedented shift through ARRA, the imaginary did not hold fast. I argue that the public was not informed nor concerned enough about global warming, during the Financial Crisis, to demand this federal action. As a result, Obama’s ARRA was interpreted as a stimulus package to solve the socio-economic crisis, which happened to include green investmentan indication to his political alignment rather than a national imperative. 


	Nevertheless, the public’s view on global warming is changing. Media organizations, environmental groups, and scientific reports are sounding the alarm. Visible and catastrophic weather events, such as the 2018 Camp Fire wildfire, forewarn the tangible consequences of inaction. Even still, I anticipate that the “Green” New Deal’s radical policy platform will only be politically solvent when the public demands it. To put simply, there must be an ecological/environmental crisis that affects the American public’s psyche to the extent that the Great Depression did during the 1930’s. Critics may argue that if given control over the House, Senate and Presidency, the Democratic party would be able to push through the GND reforms. However, one can easily look to the Affordable Care Act (ACA), passed in 2010, when the Democratic party held wide majorities in both chambers and the Oval Office. One less vote in the Senate or four vote changes in the House of Representatives could have defeated the ACA (Price and Norbeck).  In comparison, the GND platform entails sweeping political, social and economic reforms that would incur incomparable and formidable resistance from fossil fuels industries, political groups, and entrenched special interests. For the time being, policy makers and environmental activists should continue to publicize the GND and instill its concepts into the public’s consciousness. Jasanoff and Kim write that imaginaries “at once describe attainable futures and prescribe futures that states believe ought to be attained” (120). The sociopolitechnical imaginary of the GND prescribes a future where the American public is employed, secure, and safe from the effects of climate change. This future is laudable, but the public should know that it is attainable. Competing ideologies, for example that the free market can more effectively combat global warming, still hold considerable weight. Policy makers and activists must work to communicate that these values are not incompatible with federal government intervention, but that these values can be facilitated by the federal government. The GND offers the possibilities, futures and imaginary that could guide the United States, and the world, to an equitable and sustainable future. But only the state and the public can establish what is “good, desirable, and worth attaining for a political community” (Jasanoff and Kim 123). 
