---
title: 'Erykah Badu in Baduizm: Neo-Soul “Food for Thought”[Writing]'
author: ''
date: '2019-04-20'
slug: erykah-badu-in-baduizm-neo-soul-food-for-thought
---


In Erykah’s introduction to “Appletree”, she says that she “has some food for thought” not “that edible food, that you eat”. These lyrics illuminate both how Badu envisions herself and, inevitably, how others viewed her. Through her music specifically, and throughout her life generally, Badu acts as a conduit. Through her, listeners and followers can gain access to a knowledge about the world that they might not otherwise receive. Her album Baduizm addresses and discusses love, sex, knowledge and the world around her, set on top of a smooth neo-soul sound. She incorporates influences from jazz, hip-hop, r&b and soul into a distinct form that has cross-influenced later forms of black/African American music. In this essay, I will explore her album’s significance and lasting impact on both the musical and popular world. Then, I will analyze “Sometimes”, a track on her album, pointing out and expressing the elements that make it representative of Baduizm as a whole. Lastly, I will examine Badu’s recent controversies and how we can weigh them against the imagery that Baduizm created.


	Badu released Baduizm, her debut album, when she was twenty five years old and last year was its twentieth anniversary. Neo-soul, as a label didn’t exist until the year of its release when music executive Kedar Massenburg coined it in 1997 (Mathis). Its particular style, of course influenced by hip-hop and soul, helped set “the tone for a cool decade’s worth of departures from the smoothly produced R&B that ruled the airwaves”, Mathis writes. It was not just the sound, but also the feels or “vibe” of Baduizm engendered the term neo-soul. “Neo-soul came to represent a higher-minded alternative” to r&b (Okoth-Obbo). Going further Okoth-Obbo says that Erykah Badu was revived soul for a new generation, inspiring “Janelle Monàe, Solange, D.R.A.M., and many more”. In essence, Baduizm conceptually and sound-wise reinvigorated and stood on its roots of soul, hip-hop and jazz that changed the black popular music for the better. 
	
	
On the track “Sometimes”, there are many elements that draw from the Afro-American legacy of black popular music. From the beginning to (0:24), Conga drums provide an African feel and rhythm to introduce the main portion of the song. On every eighth note, a harder, louder bang on the drums is reminiscent of the “One” beat rhythm that James Brown incorporated in many of his most famous songs.  Interspersed between the beats of the drums are the “twangs” that sound like electric guitars being strummed. These “twangs” continue throughout the song. At (0:11), Erykah Badu begins to sing and add her voice as a layer to the track, singing “Ye yo ye yo”. Then after (0:19), the bassline and drums and keyboard comes quickly. The drums signal a transition to the main portion of the song by a series of repetitions that alert the listener to a change. At (0:24), the Conga drums disappear and for the rest of the song, the drums add a kick every two beats and a tap on the cymbals every beat (high hat?). Then, the bass, probably standing bass, comes in, providing the background that the rest of the songs is structured to and layered on top of. With little variation, the bassline is a consistent “BA-DUM  BA-DUM  BA-DUM  BA-DUM” that the listener can bop his or her head toalmost like a heartbeat. The piano plays the same riff over and over every eight counts, making a “DA-DUNN” sound. From this point on, the instrumental of the track repeats for the most part. With the exception of a few pauses, a change in key board riff, and other smaller detailed effects. Overall, the background of the track creates a consistent feel and rhythm that doesn’t distract from Badu’s vocals, but highlights them in a meaningful way. 


The lyrics to “Sometimes” tell a story about a person who is conflicted about how he or she feels about a lover. The verses are separated into two distinct sections that can be temporally analyzed. In the first section of a verse, Badu sings “sometimes” before saying the next line; whereas, in the second section, she sings “meanwhile” before her lines. Meaning can be drawn out from the decision to use different language. For example, in the first verse, she sings “Sometimes/I don't love you anymore/Sometimes/I'm in love with you”, and in the second verse, she sings “Meanwhile/You’ve been running through my dome/Meanwhile/Won’t leave me alone”. In the first section, the person is oscillating from two different states at different times as he or she goes throughout their life. Yet, while the person changes his or her mind, unsure about how she feels, he or she is constantly thinking about their lover. Even though he or she can’t decide whether to hate or love their lover, the thoughts of him or her “Won’t leave [them] alone”. The chorus of “Sometimes” consists of the person asking, pleading for an answer to how he or she feels their lover. Badu sings “Can you tell me where, oh where/Oh where, oh where?/Where did the love go”. The person speaks to the generic “You”, which could be the lover, but also could be God or a higher power. Questioning or seeking knowledge and God as a being is a particular motif within Baduizm. For example, in the track “On and On”, she has several references to mathematics, epistemology and God. She sings “If your knowledge were your wealth then it will be well earn” and “the man that knows something knows that he knows nothing at all”, explicitly including philosophy into the vein of her song. 


When Badu speaks, people listen. Her widespread popularity she earned from the quality and smoothness of her neo-soul sound; however, her unique epistemic philosophy, and enigmatic personality has given her a platform on which people pay attention. From A-list celebrities to her own three children, she has been a source of knowledge, wisdom and guidance. In some cases, the knowledge given seems grossly disparate from her musical talents. When home schooling her first child, she would teach them about quantum physics and even photography (Bakare).  The hip-hop artist Drake even went to Badu’s house to ask for information about his relationship with a womanhe raps about the interaction in his song, “Days in the East”: “Remember one night, I went to Erykah Badu, she made tea for me” (Bakare).  


However, this spotlight combined with her viewpoints has also led to controversy that reflects her lack of, or at least understanding of, some knowledge. For example, when she faced backlash after she performed at the birthday of Swaziland’s repressive absolute monarch, King Mswati III, she shrugged off all responsibility, saying that she “[doesn’t] belong to anyone or to anything” (Bakare) and therefore is absolved of not knowing. In fact, Bakare believes that Badu is aware that she lives in a bubble, ignoring the world around her. Besides not watching television, she has “[her] own world” (Bakare). Thus, the Erykah Badu of reality and the speaker imagined in Baduizm lies in stark contrast. 


Or maybe not… Through its lyrics, Baduizm projects an imagery to its listeners almost deifying Badu as a preacher of some foreign knowledge. In her song, “On and On”, she sings about being “born under water” and “the mothership that can’t save [us]”, alien and surreal references that allude to some greater thing that she knows and we don’t. How do we reconcile this image with the Badu who problematically expresses, albeit indirect, support of a New Zealand school decision to require girls to wear long skirts (Bakare)? Yet, maybe these two identities are one and the same. Maybe the ultimate knowledge that she is trying to emphasize in Baduizm is the simple fact that being unapologetically yourself is the wisest way to live. Lyrics from “Appletree” emphasize this idea well: “I don't walk around trying to be what I'm not…” “Cause I can't please you and that's why I do what I do”. Erykah Badu and her album are impressively influential for their staying power and relevancy. Hopefully, listeners will continue to reflect on the meanings behind the Baduizm’s lyrics and absorb all the knowledge that Badu let there for us, just some “food for thought”.

