---
title: Cities, Grants, Climate [Writing]
author: ''
date: '2019-11-29'
categories:
  - Writing
slug: cities-grants-climate-writing
---

An Urbanized World

The highlights of the UN World Urbanization Prospects (2018) report begins by stating simply that “the future of the world’s population is urban” (United Nations 3).  The report estimates that by 2050, two-thirds of the world will live in urban areas (United Nations 5). And although there will be considerable variation between regions, levels of urbanization will increase globally (5). More developed regions, such as the Americas, Europe and Oceania, will experience lower rates of urbanization, while Asia and Africa will urbanize more rapidly and in greater numbers (7).  The report estimates that the “world’s population is projected to add 2.5 billion people to the urban population by 2050, with almost 90 per cent of this growth happening in Asia and Africa” (10). Thus, “most of the urban population of the world will be concentrated in Asia (52 per cent) and Africa (22 per cent) in 2050” (10).  Put another way, by mid-century, of those living in urban areas, 7 in 10 will live in Africa or Asia. For many countries in these regions, the urban infrastructure needed to house, transport, and provide for their growing urban populations is only beginning to be built.  Energy demand and energy consumption for cities will grow proportionally. How these regions continue to urbanize is of preeminent importance. Unlike their European and American predecessors, as these Asian and African urban areas develop, each must contend with the dual challenges of climate change mitigation and adaptation. Sustainable urban development, in these regions, must address both. Unsustainable urban development has the potential to “lock in” substantial future emissions, while disadvantaging communities threatened by global warming.   
In the process of urbanization, Western countries powered their economies with fossils fuels, designed their cities around automobile transportation, and deforested the surrounding area. Electrical generation was centralized; energy efficiency and conservation, carbon drawdown, and biodiversity were trivial concerns, if at all. The result has been widespread urban sprawl, destructive ecological degradation, air, land and water pollution, and most importantly, massive greenhouse gas emissions. Globally, cities contribute almost 80% of all greenhouse gases (World Economic Forum). Thus, in most countries, cities are the primary emitters. For example, in a study that analyzed carbon emissions for over 13,000 cities world-wide, researchers found that in the “U.K., London, Manchester and Birmingham combined contribute more than 20 percent of national output; whereas in the U.S. people living in Chicago, New York and Los Angeles combine to account for nearly 10 percent of the country’s overall footprint” (Global Gridded). Because this fact, the emissions intensity of developed countries’ urban areas is partly responsible for global cumulative emissions. It is estimated that the United States is responsible for 25% of the world’s cumulative CO2 emissions, while the European Union has contributed around 22% (Ritchie & Roser). In comparison, Africa and Indiaregions that are only now rapidly urbanizinghave each contributed a meager 3%. For developing urban areas in Africa and Asia to follow an emissions intensive urbanization pathway would make mitigation extremely difficult. The 2018 IPCC Summary for Policymakers states that if we are to achieve limited overshoot of 1.5°C warming, “global net anthropogenic CO2 emissions [must] decline by about 45% from 2010 levels by 2030, reaching net zero around 2050 (Summary for Policymakers).  Therefore, urban planning, energy efficient building codes, distributed alternative energy systems and other decarbonizing measures must be deployed to mitigate future emissions from these developing cities. 

Cities and urban areas in Africa and Asia must also contend with climate change adaptation. “The risk of disruptive climate change is real and immediate”, Professor Micheal McElroy writes in Energy and Climate: Vision for the Future (McElroy 1). “Weather”, he writes, “is increasingly more extreme—[the planet is] experiencing more record-breaking heat waves,  devastating forest fires, violent storms, floods, and droughts” (McElroy 2). In response, cities in developed countries have begun to make strides to adapt to the realities of climate change. In Finland, 78% of cities have a plan for adapting to climate change. (Reckien, & Heidrich). A 2013 report, titled Adaptation Strategies for European Cities, “raised awareness throughout Europe of the importance of preparing for climate change in cities and encouraged the exchange of knowledge and good practice” (Adaption Strategies). In the United States, Chicago has developed policies to repave its roads with permeable materials, plant more trees and offer tax incentives to encourage green office roofs (How cities are adapting). Every region, country, and city will experience the effects of global warming and climate change; however, the risks and dangers will be largely concentrated in areas lacking indispensable resiliency that development affords. A report from the Center for Global Development claims that “poor people in developing countries will feel the impacts first and worst (and already are) because of vulnerable geography and lesser ability to cope with damage from severe weather and rising sea levels. In short, climate change will be awful for everyone but catastrophic for the poor” (Climate Change).  In these developing regions, the poor will increasingly be concentrated in urban areas that lack basic services, otherwise known as slums. For example, in sub-Saharan Africa, 71.8% of urban dwellers live in slums, the highest proportion in the world (WHO).  Urban areas in both Africa and Asia will need to adapt to climate change in order to protect their most vulnerable inhabitants, the poor, elderly, and young, from undue inequalities of risk. Infrastructure that improves the livability, connectivity, and resiliency of these developing cities has the potential to do just that.  

It is imperative then that urban areas in developing regions, such as Africa and Asia, must sustainably urbanize. If these regions fail to pursue the dual goals of greenhouse emission mitigation and climate change adaptation, then the risks that climate change poses to human health, social wealth being, economic growth, and stability globally will certainly grow exponentially. Heat, drought, storms, etc. will become more dangerous, and these urban centers, where most of the world will live by mid-century, will be unprepared to respond. To achieve these goals, urban areas will need financing. From procuring distributed energy generation technologies to meet rising urban demand to retrofitting existing infrastructure to limit urban consumption, mitigation will be costly; furthermore, urban areas will need technical assistance, urban planners, administrators, and organizers to implement policies that further climate change adaptation. The question remains: how will sustainable urbanization in these developing regions be financed and implemented? 

Block Grants for Sustainable Urban Development

In the United States, block grants are used by the federal government to provide state and local governments a specified amount of funding to assist them in addressing broad purposes (Dilger and Boyd).  Some argue that block grants “increase government efficiency and program effectiveness by redistributing power and accountability” (Dilger and Boyd). Proponents claim that state and local governments understand best the issues that their citizens face. Compared to the federal government, not only are subnational governments often more accessible to input from the people under their jurisdiction but they also can better engage local stakeholders to buy into the project or reform. Thus, given the resources to achieve a federally mandated “broad purpose”, local and state governments can then adapt their actions to most effectively do so. Conversely, opponents contest that block grants can be difficult to monitor, and thereby more challenging to hold state and local government officials accountable for their decisions (Dilger and Boyd). Critics point out that block grants are susceptible to corruption, mismanagement and waste: the decentralization of decision-making and lack of oversight, they contend, causes block grants to be more problematic than beneficial.  In this paper, I will first evaluate the success of a block grant program called the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant (EECBG). This federal program provided 3.2 billion (USD) in block grants to cities, communities, states, U.S. territories, and Indian tribes to develop, promote, implement, and manage energy efficiency, renewable energy and conservation projects (Energy.gov). At first glance, the program worked: lifetime energy savings and renewable generation amounted to 413 million source MMBTUs, 62,900 jobs were created or retained, and for every EECBG dollar spent, program participants received approximately 1.76 (USD) in bill savings over the lifetime of the measures installed (Energy.gov).  Yet despite these achievements, the EECBG program was not renewed, causing local partnerships with the federal government on efficiency and renewable energy projects to plummet (Energy News).  Although the EECBG was just a single domestic U.S. public policy, I will argue that international climate financing, specifically for developing regions, should increasingly incorporate the EECBG model—the redirection of funding, knowledge, and decision making to the subnational (city, local and state governments). Paradoxically, cities and urban areas in developing countries face barriers in accessing climate finance for mitigation and adaptation (Cities), yet as a result of trends in urbanization, these cities are where most people will live, consume energy, and emit greenhouse gases into the next century. International climate finance, then, should consciously steer funds and technical assistance to subnational/local/municipal governments so they can enact policies to reduce energy consumption and diversify local energy production. The Climate Policy Initiative conducted a report on global climate finance flows that estimated for the 2015/2016 years, on average grants comprised of only 4% of all climate investment (2017-Global-Landscape-of-Climate-Finance.pdf). Currently, traditional climate financing is skewed towards private investment, but there are considerable advantages to expanding climate-related financing and technical assistance in the forms of grants—like the EECBG modelthat do not leave countries in debt. This model has the potential to empower people, improve sustainability (mitigation and adaptation) policy reforms, and incentivize experimentation in the growing cities of the world. 

The EECBG Program

Near the end of his term, President George Bush signed into law the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA). Its stated purpose was to “move the United States toward greater energy independence and security” by increasing the production of renewable fuels, the efficiency of products, buildings, and vehicles, by promoting greenhouse gas capture and storage options, etc (EISA wikipedia). It was, by today’s standards, a rare display of bipartisan effort to take action on climate change, albeit framed by national security concerns. Pursuant to Title V, Subtitle E of EISA, the EECBG program was formalized, but not funded. The stated purpose is paraphrased below: 
The purpose of the program shall be to assist eligible entities in implementing strategies to reduce fossil fuel emissions created as a result of activities within the jurisdictions of eligible entities in a manner that is environmentally sustainable and maximizes benefits for local and regional communities; to reduce the total energy use of the eligible entities and to improve energy efficiency in the transportation sector, the building sector, and other appropriate sectors.
Although eligible entities included states, local governments, or Indian tribes, funds were primarily allocated to local governments (although not equivalent in all cases, for this paper, I will use local, municipal, and city government interchangeably). Namely, 68% of all grants would be allocated directly to local governments, and of those grants given to state governments (28%), no less than 60% were mandatorily redistributed to initially “ineligible” local governments---cities or towns too small to qualify at first. In short, almost 85% of all funds were given to local governments. Thus, the EECBG was, by and large, a climate change mitigation and adaptation grant program that disbursed funds to cities and local governments across the United States. Within the legislation, the EECBG outlines a wide range of strategies for local and state governments to implement: ranging from improving district heating and cooling systems to the development of on-site renewable technology to constructing bike lanes and pedestrian walkways (EISA). However, it also makes clear that any appropriate activity, determined by a number of federal agencies, would be eligible. This autonomy enables cities/local governments to pursue sustainability policies that are most appropriate to their constituents. Nevertheless, this freedom would also be a double-edged sword. By necessity, to combat fraud or mismanagement, the EECBG does devise constraints.  For example, eligible units’ proposed strategies were subject to approval by the federal government and required commitments to rigorous, sometimes annual, reporting. Stipulations on what amount could be spent on loans, administrative costs, and non-governmental organizations were mandated, as well as labor laws and disbursement deadlines for states and local governments.


	In 2009, Congress enacted the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), a massive stimulus package totaling over 800 billon (USD), to respond to the Great Recession (02-22-ARRA.pdf ). Within this ginormous bill, over 3.2 billion (USD) was appropriated to the EECBG programfunded for the first time since its formalization. According to the Department of Energy website, the EECBG program is the largest nationwide direct investment in energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies at the community level in U.S. history, increasing “renewable energy capacity, technical knowledge, and deployment of energy efficiency projects at the local level” (Energy.gov).  In 2014, the US Conference of Mayors conducted a survey to determine the implementation of EECBG funds by cities up to that point. Over 200 mayors responded to a “series of questions designed to document how this direct funding helped further city initiatives” (Smith). Their report found several noteworthy trends. First, almost 60% of cities who responded used some portion of their funds for new programs not previously included in energy/climate plans. Second, 87% of cities who responded used the majority of their funds to invest in municipal projects and operations, “such as improving city-owned buildings, upgrading streetlights, or deploying renewable energy”. Third, EECBG grants provided the primary sources of funding for newly deployed energy technologies such as energy-efficient lighting, low-energy buildings, energy-efficient appliances/pumps/other systems, and hybrid vehicles. Besides these general trends, many cities reported individual success stories. For example, one city installed over 2,000 LED streetlights, which will save it 50,000 (USD) annually. Another city leveraged its 300,000 (USD) in EECBG grant funds into a 2.5 million (USD)solar array project. From this survey, there is sufficiently qualitative evidence that the EECBG program spurred innovation, deployed new energy technologies, saved money and improved energy efficiency. Fortunately, the Department of Energy commissioned a report titled “National Evaluation of the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant Program”, which quantitatively analyzed the impact of the EECBG on five metrics: Energy Savings, Renewable Generation, Job Creation, Avoided Carbon Emissions, Bill Savings and Cost-Effectiveness. Over two thousand cities were disbursed a portion of the total EECBG appropriated funds; the average EECBG formula grant to cities was about 1 million (USD) (Smith).  There were in total 7,479 grant activities applied for across 14 broad program areas specified in EISA. The evaluation, beginning in 2011 and ending in 2015, sampled from the top six BPA’s that encompassed more than 80% of funding. The report concluded that attributable energy savings from all EECBG activities of culminated in 409 million source MMBtu for the 2009 to 2050 period, 4.2 MMBtu of on-site renewable energy projects, a net total job gain of 62,902 job years, avoided 25.7 million metric tons of carbon equivalent due to energy savings and renewable generation, saved  1.7 billion (USD) in social costs of carbon due to energy savings, produced 5.2 billion (USD) of total cumulative savings on energy bills, and met the DOE-specified cost effectiveness baseline.  
	
Conclusion 

In their book, Sustainable Urban Development in the Age of Climate Change, authors Ali Cheshmehzangi and Ayotunde Dawodu advocate that people are the “panaceas and antidote to mitigating climate change”. At present, sustainability and climate change solutions are framed by top-down paradigms. Global tax policies, the EU’s Emissions Trading System, China’s Tengger Desert Solar Park all come to mind. Unquestionably, these approaches to limit climate change and global warming have admissible importance. Yet, focusing only on the top-down can crowd out the importance of people and place. The pursuit of sustainability, the authors argue, mandates a citizen-led, bottom-up, participatory process (26).  The urban planner, Richard Florida, writes in his book, The New Urban Crisis, that “urban policies are best tailored to local conditions and local needs” (213). This strategy utilizes the advantages of local innovation, problem solving, and variation (213). The Energy Resources Professor, Micheal Webber, insists that investment in cities has to also be “socially smart”.  Instead of focusing on technology, research and development for smart cities must focus on what the citizenry needs (Power Trip, 195).  Done effectively and efficiently, smaller-scale, local initiatives are able to reduce energy expenditures and also emissions at a scale that matters (188).  Block grant programs disbursed to local/municipal governments can be a mechanism for climate funds to be controlled and managed by the people most effected by climate policies. As I have detailed in this paper, the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant program was quite successful. This year, a bill introduced by Rep. Greg Stanton (AZ-09) and Rep. Marc Veasey (TX-33) would reauthorize and increase funding for the EECBG, providing it with $3.5 billion annually for the next five years. If passed, these investments would continue to move U.S. cities forward on the path to sustainability. But to address global warming and climate change, massive amounts of capital will need to also be transferred to the most vulnerable, most vital cities in developing regions.
